---
title: 'Kinematics and Mechanics in Quantum Theory'
date: 2025-06-04
permalink: /posts/kinematics_and_mechanics/
tags:
  - courses
  - physics
---

Starting from the earliest formulations of quantum mechanics by Schrödinger, Heisenberg, Born and Jordan, the **"kinematical"** and **"mechanical"** (specifically, **dynamical**) sections of quantum theory are interwined closely together. For example, Heisenberg published his "Umdeutung (Reinterpretation) paper" using the title *Über quantentheoretische Umdeutung kinematischer und mechanischer Beziehungen* (On the quantum-theoretical reinterpretation of **kinematical** and **mechanical** relationships) in 1925. However, in most contemporary quantum‐mechanics courses, the emphasis is overwhelmingly placed on **dynamical** equations, such as Schrödinger's equation or Heisenberg's equation of motion. The importance of **kinematical** foundations, such as the role of the wavefunction or the structure of operator algebras in stationary‐state bases, is usually neglected. In contrast, as we shall see, the kinematical framework of quantum mechanics is not only indispensable for a correct formulation of the theory, but also exhibits greater creativity and structural insight than the dynamical principles alone.

> This is an important point made by Prof. Xinzheng Li(李新征) in the class "Physics Today". He is an excellent professor and a true scientist with unique and profound insights into physics. Here are his views combined with my personal understanding and experience.

Heisenberg’s 1925 paper introduced matrix mechanics by taking as fundamental the observation that in atomic systems, only discrete energy levels (stationary states) are directly observable via spectral lines. Thus, any physical quantity, such as position $x$ or momentum $p$, must be expressed in the basis of stationary‐state eigenvectors.For example, $x=[x]_{nm} e^{-i(E_n-E_m)t/\hbar}$, $p=[p]_{nm} e^{-i(E_n-E_m)t/\hbar}$, and $H=[H]_{nm} e^{-i(E_n-E_m)t/\hbar}$. The **energy conservation** rule in classical mechanics imposes $\dfrac{\mathrm{d}H}{\mathrm{d}t}=0$, or $[H]_{nm}=E_n \delta_{nm}$. Next, by differentiating the position operator with respect to time, we obtain Heisenberg’s equation of motion (orginally discovered by Born and Jordan):

$$
i\hbar\dfrac{\mathrm{d}x}{\mathrm{d}t}=\big([x]_{nm}E_m-E_n[x]_{nm}\big)e^{-i(E_n-E_m)t/\hbar}=[x,H]
$$

In classical mechanics one has $\dfrac{\mathrm{d}x}{\mathrm{d}t}=\dfrac{p}{m}$, and $H=\dfrac{p^2}{2m}+V(x)$. Invoking the **correspondence principle**, we expect this to hold in quantum mechanics, therefore $i\hbar p=\dfrac12[x,p^2]=[x,p]p+p[x,p]$. Its natural choice is $[x,p]=i\hbar$, which is exactly the Heisenberg non-commutative relation.

From this simple example, we can understand the essence of matrix mechanics: **novel kinematical description** (matrices of operators, or essentially the row state vector), and **inherited dynamical rules** (Newtonian mechanics). This conclusion is also valid for Schrödinger's wave mechanics. Without specifying the kinematical framework, the dynamical equations would have no meaning. This foundational example already illustrates that the **kinematical structure** (the Hilbert‐space representation, the algebra of operators, and the stationary‐state basis) is at least as crucial as the **dynamical** postulates (equations of motion). 

Another kinematical description of quantum mechanics is second quantization. It is proposed by Dirac in 1927 and subsequently developed by Jordan and Fock. In the first quantization scheme, the symmetry and asymmetry of bosonic and fermionic states should be handled with great care, but in the second quantization scheme, the symmetric properties are automatically satisfied by the commuting or anti-commuting properties of the creation and annihilation operators. Thus, it is a natural formalism when dealing with systems with a large number of particles, or when the number of particles can change by creation and annihilation. Second quantization should be considered as a new **kinematical** description, rather than a dynamical one, because the theory relies on the vacuum state (without explicit wavefunction in first-quantized theory), the many-particle Fock states and the creation and annihilation operators. However, the dynamical rules are more trivial compared to the kinematical ones, as they can be obtained from the Heisenberg's equation of motion. 

The third kinematical description is based on Green functions. The concept of Green functions (or propagators) is introduced by Schwinger and Dyson, and its applications in condensed matter physics are developed by Galitskii, Migdal, Kadanoff, Baym, Luttinger, Ward, Matsubara, Hedin and many others. Compared to the second quantization scheme, the Green functions merely introduce an average (or expectation value) under the ground state, but unlike the second-quantized operators, the Green function is a c-number, thus providing a **classical kinematical quantity**. Furthermore, the Green functions are directly related to the expectation values of observables and physical responses under external fields. Also, the equation of motion of the Green functions, including Dyson-Schwinger equation, and Hedin's equations (see <https://www.benasque.org/2016tddft/talks_contr/133_vanLeeuwen_Lecture3.pdf>), are closed and can be solved under certain approximations or cutoffs (such as Hartree-Fock, GW, ladder approximation, and DMFT). Thus, the Green function is much wider applied as the kinematical quantity in condensed matter physics. The Green's function, self energy, irreducible particle-hole diagrams and vertex corrections are usually introduced as first-principle quantities.